[OTEL-2370] add Span.Type tables for otel (#27143)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/schema_semantics/semantic_mapping.md

| `url.full` | `http.url` |
| `user_agent.original` | `http.useragent` |

> ## Span Type mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Span type mapping
```

> ## Span Type mapping

Author: if I understand correctly, we may be filtering service type based on this attribute (left sidebar, "select a component", "systems", "datastores" for example).

Otherwise I believe it's mainly the "type" attribute in trace explorer etc. 

Just pinged (pung?) apm-app to ask https://dd.slack.com/archives/CBGCZ9P5Y/p1737038147661419

> ## Span Type mapping

Author: apparently span.type is used to filter special spans like RUM, CI, etc. I'm not sure about the question about unintuitive locations that will look different; asked a follow-up question

> ## Span Type mapping

Author: @mrakhman provided some helpful context in that thread

> Datadog has a vendor-specific convention of "Span Type" represented by the `span.type` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog has a vendor-specific convention of "span type" represented by the `span.type` attribute.
```

> Datadog has a vendor-specific convention of "Span Type" represented by the `span.type` attribute.

Reviewer 2: nit: you have span.Type below and span.type here

Author: good point, will make this consistent.

> Based on the attributes included in your span, Datadog Agent and Datadog OpenTelemetry Components will attempt to infer the appropriate span type for better compatibility with other Datadog services. You may also explicitly set `span.type` attribute on any given span to override this logic using an [attributes][5] or [transform][6] processor, as well as by setting appropriate configuration values in OTel SDKs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the attributes included in your span, the Datadog Agent and Datadog OpenTelemetry components attempt to infer the appropriate span type for better compatibility with other Datadog services. You may also explicitly set the `span.type` attribute on any given span to override this logic using an [attributes][5] or a [transform][6] processor, as well as by setting appropriate configuration values in OpenTelemetry SDKs. 
```

> ### OTel Span Attributes -> Datadog Span Type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Map OpenTelemetry span attribute to Datadog span type
```

> The following table shows the Span Type mapping logic that is used if feature flag `enable_receive_resource_spans_v2` is set. The chart is in order of precedence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows the span type mapping logic that is used if the feature flag `enable_receive_resource_spans_v2` is set. The chart lists mappings in order of precedence.
```

> The following table shows the Span Type mapping logic that is used if feature flag `enable_receive_resource_spans_v2` is set. The chart is in order of precedence.

Reviewer 3: It would be great to point out where the `enable_receive_resource_spans_v2` needs to be anabled.
Is that on the OTel Collector?

> | # | Span Attribute | Datadog span.Type |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| # | Span attribute | Datadog `span.type` |
```

> The following table shows the span type mapping logic that is used if the feature flag `enable_receive_resource_spans_v2` is set in the Datadog Agent or the Datadog Exporter. The chart lists mappings in order of precedence.  

Reviewer 3: I've checked on the Collector-Contrib repo and I saw that the FF is available for DD Exporter and DD Connector:
https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopen-telemetry%2Fopentelemetry-collector-contrib%20enable_receive_resource_spans_v2&type=code

Does the flag need to be enabled in both components?
I guess so, right?!
Otherwise we may calculate APM stats wrongly.

Author: yes, you're right. thank you. I will fix.

|---|----------------|-------------------|
| 1 | `span.type` | `span.type` attribute value |

> | 2 | [Span Kind Server][7] | `web` |
> | 3 | [Span Kind Client][8] | see 3a/b |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2 | [Span kind server][7] | `web` |
| 3 | [Span kind client][8] | see 3a/b |
```

| 3a | Client span kind, `db.system` attribute not found | `http` |

> | 3b | Client span kind, `db.system` attribute found | see table below [OTel Database System Types -> Datadog Span Type][10] |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 3b | Client span kind, `db.system` attribute found | See the table below [Mapping OpenTelemetry database system type to Datadog span type][10] |
```

| 4 | None of above conditions were fulfilled | `custom` |

> ### OTel Database System Types -> Datadog Span Type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mapping OpenTelemetry database system type to Datadog span type
```

> In the table above, if a span is "client" kind and contains [`db.system` attribute][9], the following mapping applies for the Span Type in Datadog. As mentioned above, setting a `span.type` attribute on your span will override this logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the table above, if a span is a "client" kind and contains [`db.system` attribute][9], the following mapping applies for the span type in Datadog. Setting a `span.type` attribute on your span overrides this logic.
```

> | `db.system` | Datadog span.Type |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `db.system` | Datadog `span.type` |
```
I'm not sure whether `span.type` or `span.Type` is correct, as I see both in this document. Please make the capitalization consistent within the document.

Author: thank you. will make this consistent.

[2]: /getting_started/tagging/unified_service_tagging#opentelemetry
[3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/container/
[4]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/releases/tag/v1.27.0
[5]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/attributesprocessor
[6]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor
[7]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#server
[8]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#client
[9]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/db/#db-system

> [10]: #otel-database-system-types---datadog-span-type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[10]: #mapping-opentelemetry-database-system-type-to-datadog-span-type
```
Please verify this against the actual link - I'm not certain mine will match exactly.
